Comprehensive Summary for GitHub Copilot: PC Lockout, Admin Access, and Password Recovery from Offline Hives1. Executive Summary: Engagement Overview for GitHub CopilotThis document outlines a sequence of troubleshooting activities undertaken to regain access to a Windows PC, followed by an attempt to recover a specific local user account's password. The engagement commenced due to a complete lockout from the PC. After the exploration and application of various system access methodologies, administrative privileges were successfully re-established. The current, primary objective is the recovery of the password for the local user account 'jean-marc.samson'. This recovery effort is centered on the analysis of offline registry hive copies: ss.dat (presumed SAM hive), sy.dat (presumed SYSTEM hive), and cc.dat (presumed SECURITY hive). These hives were acquired using the native Windows reg save command.The immediate challenge impeding progress is a specific AttributeError encountered when utilizing secretsdump.py (from Impacket version 0.12.0) to process these offline hives. The error message, "'encLMHash' not associated" (or a close variant thereof), currently prevents the extraction of NTLM hashes, which are essential for the password recovery process.The purpose of this document is to furnish GitHub Copilot with a detailed chronological and contextual background. This includes the nature of the initial problem, the steps undertaken to achieve administrative access, the tools and techniques employed, the precise error encountered with secretsdump.py, and the rationale behind key methodological decisions, such as the use of reg save. This comprehensive context is intended to enable GitHub Copilot to provide targeted and effective assistance in diagnosing and resolving the secretsdump.py error or, alternatively, to suggest viable alternative strategies for recovering the password for 'jean-marc.samson' from the specified offline hive files.The progression from a complete PC lockout to an attempt at file-based password recovery suggests that more conventional recovery options, such as utilizing a pre-existing password reset disk or leveraging Microsoft account recovery mechanisms (if the account were a Microsoft account), were likely not available or had been exhausted. The focus on local offline hive files (ss.dat, sy.dat, cc.dat) strongly indicates that 'jean-marc.samson' is a local user account, as domain account recovery or Microsoft account recovery would follow different paths.1 The decision to employ reg save for hive acquisition, followed by analysis with secretsdump.py, particularly an older version like Impacket v0.12.0, may point to specific operational constraints, a preference for command-line driven offline analysis, or the use of a pre-established toolkit. This specific version of Impacket is a critical detail, as software evolves, and older versions may contain bugs or lack compatibility with newer operating system structures or security configurations.3 The error "'encLMHash' not associated" is a significant indicator of a potential parsing problem within this particular version of the tool when faced with the structure of the SAM hive from the target system.2. Phase 1: System Access Restoration – Overcoming the PC LockoutThe initial problem was a complete inability to access a Windows PC, specifically a machine running Windows 10, build 19041.508. This build, originating from mid-2020, falls within a period where numerous Local Privilege Escalation (LPE) vulnerabilities and User Account Control (UAC) bypass techniques were discovered and documented. Given the lockout, obtaining administrative privileges was the first critical step. The methods explored likely encompassed several well-documented techniques:

Accessibility Features Exploit (Utilman.exe/sethc.exe): This is a prevalent offline attack method for gaining SYSTEM-level access when locked out. It involves booting the target machine from Windows installation or recovery media (DVD or USB). From the setup screen, pressing Shift+F10 opens a command prompt. Within this recovery command prompt, the executable for an accessibility feature, such as Utilman.exe (Ease of Access Center) or sethc.exe (Sticky Keys), located in C:\Windows\System32 (or the equivalent path if the system drive letter is different in the recovery environment), is renamed (e.g., ren utilman.exe utilman.exe.bak). Subsequently, cmd.exe is copied and renamed to utilman.exe (or sethc.exe). After these modifications, the system is rebooted normally. At the Windows login screen, invoking the corresponding accessibility feature (clicking the Ease of Access icon for Utilman.exe or pressing the Shift key five times for sethc.exe) launches the command prompt with SYSTEM privileges.6 This elevated command prompt can then be used to create a new administrator account (e.g., net user NewAdmin password123 /add followed by net localgroup administrators NewAdmin /add) or reset the password of an existing account.


UAC Bypass Techniques: If initial access was possible to a standard user account but administrative rights were lacking, UAC bypass methods would have been considered. Common techniques effective around the 2020-2023 timeframe for Windows 10 build 19041.508 include:

fodhelper.exe Bypass: This technique exploits the way fodhelper.exe (a Windows executable for managing optional features) interacts with specific registry keys under the current user's hive (HKCU\Software\Classes\ms-settings\shell\open\command). An attacker can create this registry key and set its default value to a command of their choice (e.g., cmd.exe). When fodhelper.exe is subsequently executed by the user, it reads this registry key and launches the specified command with elevated privileges, bypassing the UAC prompt.
eventvwr.exe Bypass: Similar in principle to the fodhelper.exe bypass, this method targets the Event Viewer (eventvwr.exe). By creating a specific registry key (HKCU\Software\Classes\mscfile\shell\open\command) and setting its default value to a malicious command, running eventvwr.exe (which auto-elevates) will trigger the command with high integrity.
silentcleanup.exe Bypass: This method leverages the SilentCleanup scheduled task, which is configured to run with the highest privileges. An attacker can modify the %windir% environment variable within the current user's registry hive (HKCU\Environment) to point to a directory they control. A malicious executable, often named cleanmgr.exe (the legitimate target of SilentCleanup), is placed in this controlled directory. When the SilentCleanup task is manually triggered (e.g., via schtasks /run /TN \Microsoft\Windows\DiskCleanup\SilentCleanup /I), the system executes the attacker's payload with elevated rights.



Local Privilege Escalation (LPE) via Specific CVEs: Given the Windows 10 build 19041.508, several LPE vulnerabilities active or discovered between 2020 and 2023 might have been relevant if the system was unpatched:

SpoolFool (CVE-2022-21999): A vulnerability in the Windows Print Spooler service. Exploitation allows an attacker with local access to escalate privileges to SYSTEM by manipulating printer port paths, leading to arbitrary DLL loading. Proof-of-concept tools like SpoolFool.exe or SpoolFool.ps1 are often used with a custom DLL (e.g., add_user.dll) to create a new local administrator account.10
PrintNightmare (CVE-2021-34527): Another significant Print Spooler vulnerability that could lead to Remote Code Execution (RCE) or LPE. Windows 10 2004 (which includes build 19041.508) was affected if not patched with updates such as KB5004948. Exploitation typically involves forcing the spooler service to load a malicious DLL from a remote share via RPC functions like RpcAddPrinterDriverEx().
CVE-2021-1732 (Win32k LPE): This vulnerability resides in the win32kfull.sys kernel driver and is caused by an out-of-bounds write during window creation (xxxCreateWindowEx). It affected Windows 10 versions including 2004. Public exploits, often as compiled C++ executables, demonstrate escalating privileges to SYSTEM.
CVE-2019-1388 (Windows Certificate Dialog LPE): This vulnerability allows an attacker who is already logged onto a system to run processes in an elevated context. By running a specially crafted application that triggers the Windows Certificate Dialog in a specific way (often involving a link within the dialog that can open a file browser, which can then be used to launch an elevated command prompt), an attacker can gain administrative rights.14



Password Reset Tools: If direct LPE was challenging, offline password modification tools like Offline NT Password & Registry Editor (chntpw) could have been considered. This tool, typically booted from a live CD/USB, allows direct manipulation of the SAM file to clear or change local user passwords without needing to boot into Windows.21 Lazesoft Recover My Password is another utility offering similar functionality.24

Ultimately, administrative privileges were successfully obtained on the PC. This achievement was a prerequisite for the subsequent actions aimed at password recovery. The extensive range of potential LPE methods considered implies that the system lockout was not trivial to overcome, possibly due to applied patches or specific system configurations. However, the successful acquisition of admin rights shifted the strategy from privilege escalation to direct credential artifact extraction, with a clear goal of recovering specific user data rather than resorting to destructive measures like an OS reinstall. This indicates a focus on data preservation and targeted account recovery. The specific Windows 10 build (19041.508) being from mid-2020 means that without consistent patching, it could indeed be vulnerable to exploits discovered in late 2020, 2021, or 2022.123. Phase 2: Commencing Password Recovery for 'jean-marc.samson'With administrative access secured, the primary objective transitioned to recovering the password for the local Windows user account named 'jean-marc.samson'. To achieve this, a strategy involving the offline analysis of critical registry hives was adopted.

Target Data for Analysis: Three specific files were acquired from the live system for this purpose:

ss.dat: This file represents an offline copy of the Security Account Manager (SAM) hive. The SAM hive is the database where Windows stores the password hashes (typically NTLM hashes in modern systems) for all local user accounts. Accessing and correctly parsing this hive is fundamental for local password recovery.
sy.dat: This file is an offline copy of the SYSTEM hive. The SYSTEM hive is crucial because it contains the necessary cryptographic material, often referred to as the "boot key" or "Syskey" (though the actual mechanism is more complex and involves derivation from various LSA keys stored within SYSTEM), which is required to decrypt the encrypted password hashes stored within the SAM hive.2 Without the SYSTEM hive, the hashes in the SAM hive remain undecipherable.
cc.dat: This file is an offline copy of the SECURITY hive. This hive stores Local Security Authority (LSA) secrets, which can include cached domain credentials (if the machine had been domain-joined and domain users had logged on), passwords for service accounts, and the system's DPAPI master keys.27 While the primary target is a local account's NTLM hash (from SAM), acquiring the SECURITY hive allows for a more comprehensive offline analysis of other potentially valuable credentials.



Method of Hive Acquisition: reg save Command:The native Windows command-line utility reg save was employed to create these offline copies. This command requires administrative privileges, which were established in the preceding phase. The commands executed would have followed this pattern:

reg save HKLM\SAM \path\to\ss.dat
reg save HKLM\SYSTEM \path\to\sy.dat
reg save HKLM\SECURITY \path\to\cc.dat
This method is a standard and reliable way to obtain live registry hives for subsequent offline analysis.1



Rationale for reg save Method:Several factors make the reg save method a logical choice in this scenario:

Enables Offline Analysis: The primary advantage is the ability to perform time-consuming and resource-intensive tasks, such as hash cracking or detailed forensic analysis of the hives, on a separate, potentially more powerful or secure machine. This avoids impacting the performance or stability of the target system.
Reduced Live System Footprint for Dumping: While reg save itself is executed on the live system, it is a native Windows utility. The subsequent, more intensive analysis steps are performed offline. This can be less intrusive and potentially less likely to trigger EDR/AV alerts compared to running third-party memory dumping tools or direct LSASS access tools on the live system.
Broad Tool Compatibility: Many credential recovery and forensic analysis tools, including the chosen secretsdump.py, are specifically designed to process offline registry hive files obtained in this manner.2
Snapshot of System State: reg save captures a point-in-time snapshot of the registry hives, which can be crucial for consistent analysis.


The deliberate naming convention (ss.dat, sy.dat, cc.dat) suggests a methodical approach to file management for this recovery task. It also implies an understanding of the specific hives required for NTLM hash extraction and LSA secret recovery. The choice of reg save over direct LSASS memory dumping techniques (e.g., using Task Manager or ProcDump followed by Mimikatz) for local account password recovery is a direct route. reg save accesses the persisted hashes in the SAM file, which is the authoritative source for local accounts. While LSASS contains credentials for currently logged-on users and cached domain credentials, for recovering a specific local user's password hash, accessing the SAM hive directly is often more straightforward and less prone to interference from LSASS protection mechanisms. The acquisition of all three hives (SAM, SYSTEM, and SECURITY) demonstrates a comprehensive strategy, allowing for broader credential analysis beyond just the target NTLM hash if needed. This indicates an awareness of the interdependencies, such as the SYSTEM hive's role in decrypting SAM data.4. Phase 3: secretsdump.py Execution and Error AnalysisFollowing the acquisition of the offline registry hives, the chosen tool for extracting the NTLM hashes was secretsdump.py from the Impacket collection, specifically identified as Impacket version 0.12.0.

Tool Selection and Intended Operation:secretsdump.py is a widely recognized and versatile Python script used for dumping various secrets from Windows systems. Its capabilities include extracting NTLM hashes from SAM hives (both live and offline), LSA secrets, and even Active Directory NTDS.dit contents.1 The user intended to leverage this tool to parse the previously saved ss.dat (SAM), sy.dat (SYSTEM), and cc.dat (SECURITY) files to retrieve the NTLM hash associated with the 'jean-marc.samson' user account.
A typical command invocation for processing local offline hives with secretsdump.py would be:python secretsdump.py -sam ss.dat -system sy.dat -security cc.dat LOCALThis command instructs secretsdump.py to use the provided SAM, SYSTEM, and SECURITY hive files for a LOCAL dump, meaning it will process them as local account database files.2


Encountered Error:Upon execution with Impacket v0.12.0, secretsdump.py failed, producing an AttributeError. The specific error message reported was: 'SAMHashes' object has no attribute 'encLMHash' (or a very similar phrasing indicating the encLMHash attribute was not found on an object of type SAMHashes).
This Python AttributeError signifies that the script, during its execution, attempted to access an attribute named encLMHash on an object it expected to have this attribute, but the object instance did not possess it. This often points to an unexpected data structure or a bug in the script's logic for handling the data it encountered. Similar issues with secretsdump.py, particularly concerning updates, version incompatibilities, or missing attributes/modules, have been noted in various contexts.3


Context of Error:The error most likely occurred during the phase where secretsdump.py attempts to parse individual user account entries from the SAM hive (ss.dat), after having used the boot key derived from the SYSTEM hive (sy.dat) for initial decryption processes. The attribute encLMHash would logically refer to an encrypted LanManager (LM) hash.
Table: Tool Interaction Summary

ToolVersionTarget FilesAttempted Command (Illustrative)Error Messagesecretsdump.pyImpacket v0.12.0ss.dat, sy.dat, cc.datpython secretsdump.py -sam ss.dat -system sy.dat -security cc.dat LOCAL'encLMHash' not associatedThe error message concerning `encLMHash` is particularly telling. LanManager (LM) hashes are an older, weaker form of password hashing that has been largely deprecated in modern Windows systems for security reasons. Windows 10, especially build 19041.508, would typically not store LM hashes by default, or if it does, they would be "null" hashes (often represented by the specific string `aad3b435b51404eeaad3b435b51404ee` [2]). It is plausible that Impacket v0.12.0, an older version of the toolkit, has a bug or an unhandled edge case in its offline SAM parsing logic when it encounters a SAM hive where LM hashes are absent, disabled, or represented in this nullified manner. The script might be expecting to find an `encLMHash` attribute (perhaps for an encrypted form of the LM hash or a placeholder) on its internal `SAMHashes` object representation, and the absence of this attribute due to the modern hive's structure leads to the `AttributeError`.

The problem is therefore more likely rooted in the specific version of Impacket (v0.12.0) and its compatibility or parsing robustness with offline hives from this Windows 10 build, rather than a fundamental corruption of the hive files themselves, assuming the `reg save` operations completed without error. This suggests that alternative approaches, such as using a newer version of Impacket or a different tool altogether, might be necessary to successfully extract the NTLM hashes.
5. Contextual Brief for GitHub Copilot: Next Steps and Support AreasThe immediate objective remains the extraction of the NTLM password hash for the user account 'jean-marc.samson' from the offline registry hives: ss.dat (SAM), sy.dat (SYSTEM), and cc.dat (SECURITY). The primary obstacle is the AttributeError: 'SAMHashes' object has no attribute 'encLMHash' encountered with secretsdump.py (Impacket v0.12.0). Assistance is sought to overcome this error or to identify effective alternative methods.Key questions and areas where GitHub Copilot's expertise would be beneficial include:

Diagnosing the secretsdump.py v0.12.0 Error:

Are there known bugs or limitations in Impacket v0.12.0's secretsdump.py script related to the encLMHash attribute when processing offline SAM hives, particularly from Windows 10 build 19041.508?
How does the absence or "null" status of LM hashes in modern Windows SAM files (common in Windows 10 2) interact with the parsing logic of secretsdump.py v0.12.0? Could this be the trigger for the observed AttributeError?
Could specific Python environment configurations or incomplete/corrupted Impacket v0.12.0 dependencies manifest as this AttributeError?4
Is there any known patch, code modification, or specific invocation flag for secretsdump.py v0.12.0 that addresses this encLMHash issue with offline hives?



Alternative Tools or Impacket Versions for Offline Hive Analysis:

Impacket Version Update: Is it highly probable that upgrading to a more recent, stable version of Impacket (and thus secretsdump.py) would resolve this encLMHash attribute error when parsing these hives?3
Mimikatz Offline Analysis:

Can Mimikatz be used to directly process the saved ss.dat (SAM) and sy.dat (SYSTEM) files for NTLM hash extraction?
What are the precise Mimikatz commands for such an offline operation (e.g., lsadump::sam /sam:ss.dat /system:sy.dat)?44
Is the cc.dat (SECURITY hive) required by Mimikatz for local NTLM hash extraction, or are SAM and SYSTEM files sufficient? (Typically, SAM and SYSTEM are the core requirements for local NTLM hashes).


pwdump Family Tools:

Are there reputable standalone executable versions of pwdump (e.g., pwdump7 49, pwdump8 50, fgdump, gsecdump 39) that are known to be compatible with Windows 10 build 19041.508 and can process offline SAM and SYSTEM hives?
What would be the typical command-line syntax for these tools when provided with ss.dat and sy.dat as input?


PowerShell-based Solutions:

Do robust PowerShell scripts exist, perhaps from frameworks like Nishang (e.g., Get-PassHashes.ps1 62) or DSInternals (e.g., Get-BootKey in conjunction with SAM parsing cmdlets 69), that can effectively parse these offline hives if executed with necessary administrative privileges on an analysis machine?


Other Credential Dumping Utilities:

Are there other well-regarded tools that specialize in the offline parsing of SAM/SYSTEM/SECURITY hives for NTLM hash extraction that should be considered? For instance, NtdsAudit was mentioned for AD environments but its principles might extend or suggest alternatives.72





Understanding SAM Structure Relative to encLMHash:

Within the internal workings of Impacket's SAM parsing logic, what specific data structure or field within a raw SAM hive entry does the encLMHash attribute represent?
How is the boot key, derived from the SYSTEM hive, utilized in the decryption or preparation of this (or the NTLM) hash field that secretsdump.py attempts to process?29



Verification of Hive Integrity (Secondary Consideration):

While less probable if reg save completed without apparent errors, are there any straightforward methods or lightweight tools to perform a basic integrity check on the ss.dat, sy.dat, and cc.dat files? This would help rule out fundamental file corruption as a contributing factor to this specific AttributeError.


The user has demonstrated technical proficiency in reaching this stage of the recovery process. Assistance should focus on providing concrete, actionable solutions—either by rectifying the issue with Impacket v0.12.0 or by recommending direct, effective alternatives. The context of Windows 10 build 19041.508 is paramount, as any suggested tools or techniques must be compatible with its security architecture and hash storage mechanisms. The error involving encLMHash on a modern Windows 10 build, where LM hashing is deprecated, strongly suggests the issue lies in the older tool's handling of this deprecated feature in an offline context. The primary goal is the NTLM hash for 'jean-marc.samson'.6. ConclusionThe immediate path forward requires addressing the AttributeError: 'SAMHashes' object has no attribute 'encLMHash' encountered with Impacket v0.12.0's secretsdump.py. Given that LM hashes are deprecated and typically nullified on Windows 10 build 19041.508, this error likely stems from an incompatibility or bug in how this older version of secretsdump.py parses offline SAM hives lacking, or having null, LM hash data.Recommendations for GitHub Copilot's Assistance:
Prioritize Impacket Version Update: The most straightforward solution is often to use the latest stable version of the tool. Guidance on safely upgrading Impacket and retrying the secretsdump.py command with the current hive files (ss.dat, sy.dat, cc.dat) should be the first line of inquiry. Newer versions are more likely to handle variations in SAM hive structures from modern Windows builds correctly.
Explore Mimikatz for Offline Analysis: If updating Impacket is not immediately feasible or successful, using Mimikatz for offline hive analysis is a strong alternative. Copilot should provide the exact command syntax for lsadump::sam targeting the ss.dat and sy.dat files.
Investigate pwdump Variants: As a third option, if standalone executables are preferred, guidance on a reliable pwdump variant (like pwdump7, pwdump8, or gsecdump) compatible with Windows 10 and capable of processing offline SAM and SYSTEM hives would be valuable. This should include typical command syntax.
Clarify encLMHash in Impacket v0.12.0: If the user wishes to understand the root cause within v0.12.0, an explanation of how encLMHash was intended to be used by that version and why its absence/null state in a modern SAM hive might cause an AttributeError would be beneficial.
Basic Hive Integrity Check: Suggest simple methods (if any exist that don't require specialized forensic tools) to perform a cursory check on the hive files for obvious corruption, though this is a less likely cause of this specific Python attribute error.
The focus should be on actionable steps to extract the NTLM hash for 'jean-marc.samson', enabling the user to proceed with password cracking or other recovery measures.